I would like to discuss the wisdom or
lack of wisdom
in
calories in calories out as a
philosophy.
[Music]
Hey, my name is John Jaguish. I'm a
doctor of biomedical engineering which
gives me a unique perspective on all
sorts of things physical medicine
related sports science training all the
way from beginners to professional
athletes. And today I would like to
discuss the wisdom or lack of wisdom in
calories in calories out as a
philosophy.
So, I don't really want to jump in the
middle of that fight. And for those of
you not following, there's a lot of
people arguing whether or not
counting calories is like the smart
thing to do. There is some merit there.
And I I I do want to say the way we've
we found out how many calories are in
whatever food it is is with a device
called a bomb calerimeter. What that
does is you put food in a bomb
calerimeter, you know, let's say an
ounce of steak, the device lights it on
fire. So that's how we measure energy in
the body or I should say that's how some
people have measured energy in the body,
which is sort of ridiculous because your
body doesn't light anything on fire.
Like it breaks it down into its basic
elements. And those basic elements have
hormonal implications. is they have
different calorie usages
and I say calories only because that's
how we measure it but usages of energy
in order to digest. So like they call
this the thermic effect of food. So
no matter what it really looks like
that raw number, that calorie number,
it might be a fairly decent guideline.
But let me talk about two studies that
really defeat
that idea. Uh the first one is a mouse
study. And I know people are going to
say, "Well, animal models, they're crap
because like an animal's biochemistry is
different than ours."
This is absolutely true. However,
human ethics boards at universities
don't allow researchers to put people in
cages and control what they eat. So,
when people do nutrition study, they're
supposed to journal what they eat. or
sometimes they come to like a cafeteria
and they have specific meals prepared
for them. But that doesn't mean they
don't have a bag of Doritos in their
car.
So from a mechanistic standpoint,
I like the animal models because they
can show us some things that are much
more questionable when it comes to
humans who are being studied. Also, the
reason I'm filming in my car today is so
talking about a complex subject and I
don't want anybody to think I'm reading
off like a Q card or anything. I
actually do study this and I'm
passionate about it and I I know what
I'm talking about at least with the
studies that I'm referencing and I must
admit I am semi a nutrition research
novice. I always defer to Professor Bart
K or Dr. Shaun Baker or Dr. for Anthony
Chaffy.
I think they are much better versed in
the nutrition literature. However, I
agree with their positions and am up to
speed on that literature. So, first
study I want to talk about is one using
mice where they were isocaloric studies
uh two isocoric groups, test group and
control group.
So that means that the mice ate exactly
the same amount of food, both groups. So
you think if calories in, calories out,
both groups will have the same effect of
either building fat mass or building
muscle mass or having the same
composition. So one of these groups of
mice
ate all at once. They had one meal. They
had a certain period of time to eat all
their food and because they were
deprived of food for the whole day, they
they went through all the food. The
other group was allowed to have access
to their food over the course of 24
hours. So, they basically kept grazing
and kind of snacking, but ultimately the
same amount of food. And I cannot
emphasize that enough. The same amount
of food. The group
that
ate one meal
got leaner
and the group that ate throughout the
day got fatter.
So if calories in, calories out, why did
that happen?
So I think it's just something important
to keep in mind. I'm an advocate of
fasting
for a number of reasons. this this being
one of them. Also, I I like the idea
that we can just focus on fat loss,
drop as much body fat as possible, and
then get back to building. So, I'd
rather spend more time building than
dieting. And I think the world of
fitness kind of has that backwards.
Second study is one on humans. And
this took two groups of people. So, it
was isocchloric and they looked at one
group of people who had 2.4 grams per
kilogram of protein. And the other group
who I think it was 1.4 or 1.6.
Obviously, I'm driving so I can't look
it up. The high protein group gained
muscle and lost fat. The low protein
group gained fat and lost muscle.
Now, to be fair, I got to tell you the
details of this study. They were all
obese people who were physically active
yet not doing strength training and they
started to do strength training in the
study and we all know like beginner
gains. Yeah, it's easier to gain muscle
when you're a beginner. But I'm not
necessarily talking about that. I'm just
talking about the wisdom of
timerestricted eating windows. I think
these are beneficial. The study of them
is superior to the calories in calories
out. But again, like I'm not going to
debate anybody on that subject. I'm
really referencing studies and some
other people who share the same position
I have. And I think if you're on this
path, please don't think calories are
the answer to everything because I I
think that that just has you white
knuckling life and that's a a crummy way
to be. And I think this information will
be very helpful. If this video helped
you, I want you to subscribe and follow.
I'm going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.